[DOC-1098] Cluster balancing (#29578)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/architecture/docdb-sharding/cluster-balancing.md

### Remote bootstrap

The cluster balancer creates new tablet replicas by a process called remote bootstrap. This involves copying data from a [YB-TServer](../../yb-tserver/) hosting an up-to-date [tablet peer](../../docdb-replication/replication/#tablet-peers) (typically, the geographically closest peer) to the destination YB-TServer.

### Blacklisting

A YB-TServer can be blacklisted or "leader blacklisted" to prevent it from hosting data or leaders, respectively. Blacklists are used to facilitate graceful shutdowns (for example, when performing staged restarts or OS patching on a node).

## Cluster balancing scenarios

Cluster balancing automatically occurs when a cluster is scaled in or out, when there are node outages (for example, a failed node, or a network partition), and after creating or deleting tables and tablets.

### Cluster balancing when scaling

#### Scaling out

When scaling out (adding nodes), the cluster balancer will gracefully move tablet data and leaders to the new nodes, without any application impact. Tablet leaders handle queries, so moving leaders is equivalent to moving where the queries execute.

#### Scaling in

> When scaling in, nodes being removed are marked as "blacklisted". This signals to the cluster balancer that it should:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When scaling in, removed nodes are marked as "blacklisted". This signals to the cluster balancer that it should do the following:
```

- Gracefully transfer leadership off of the node being removed.
- Re-replicate the data that was on the node to other nodes in the same region.

After all data and queries have moved off of the node, the node can be removed safely.

Blacklisting is performed automatically by YugabyteDB Anywhere and YugabyteDB Aeon. For yugabyted clusters, you should use [yb-admin](../../../admin/yb-admin/#change-blacklist) to blacklist the node being removed.

### Cluster balancing after node outages

On an unplanned node outage, cluster balancing occurs twice: first when the node goes down, and again if the node recovers.

> #### When the node goes down

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> On an unplanned node outage, cluster balancing occurs twice: when the node goes down, and if or when it recovers.

Reviewer 2: when the node goes down, and if or when it recovers -> first when the node goes down, and again if the node recovers

- Tablet leadership is automatically transferred to healthy nodes in 3 seconds.

> - If the node is down for a prolonged time (according to [follower_unavailable_considered_failed_sec](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#follower-unavailable-considered-failed-sec), which is 15 minutes by default) the cluster balancer starts creating new replicas of the data on the failed node on other nodes in the same region (if any exist).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the node stays down for a predetermined length of time (15 minutes by default, as set using the [follower_unavailable_considered_failed_sec](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#follower-unavailable-considered-failed-sec) flag) the cluster balancer starts creating new replicas of the data that was on the failed node on other nodes in the same region (if any exist).
```

> - Queries will succeed as soon as tablet leaders move off of the failed node. The data balancing phase does not impact the availability of the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Queries will succeed as soon as tablet leaders move off of the failed node. The data balancing phase does not impact the availability of the database.
```

> #### When the failed node recovers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If or when the failed node recovers, the cluster balancer rebalances tablet leaders onto the recovered node, as well as tablet data (if data had moved off of the node).

### Table and tablet creation and deletion

> Operations that create or delete tablets may also trigger cluster balancing. Some examples of operations that may trigger cluster balancing are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operations that create or delete tablets may also trigger cluster balancing. These can include the following:
```

- Creating a table
- Dropping a table
- [Tablet splitting](../tablet-splitting/)

## Monitoring cluster balancer progress

While leader rebalancing is fast, data rebalancing can take anywhere from seconds to hours. The major factors influencing how long data rebalancing takes are:

- The size of data on the failed node.
- The configured network and disk throughput.

> - Cluster balancer configuration flags (described in the [Flags section](#flags)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Cluster balancer configuration flags (see [Flags](#flags) for details).
```

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">
  <li>
    <a href="#yugabyted" class="nav-link active" id="yugabyted-tab" data-bs-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="yugabyted" aria-selected="true">
      <img src="/icons/database.svg" alt="Database Icon">
      yugabyted
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="#yba" class="nav-link" id="yba-tab" data-bs-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="yba" aria-selected="false">
      <img src="/icons/server.svg" alt="Server Icon">
      YugabyteDB Anywhere
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

<div class="tab-content">
  <div id="yugabyted" class="tab-pane fade show active" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="yugabyted-tab">

With yugabyted, you can access the YB-Master UI at <http://localhost:7000> to access two views to monitor the cluster balancer progress.

> #### Tablet Servers view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Tablet Servers view**
```

> The "Tablet Servers" view contains information about how many peers and leaders are hosted on each tablet server, as well as whether each tablet server is currently data or leader blacklisted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Tablet Servers** view provides information about how many peers and leaders are hosted on each tablet server, as well as whether each tablet server is currently data or leader blacklisted.
```

To access the view, click **Tablet Servers** on your YB-Master UI.

#### Cluster Balancer view

This view is available only in YugabyteDB {{<release "2024.2.6">}} and later, and {{<release "2025.1.1">}} and later.

> The Cluster Balancer view displays information about:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cluster Balancer view displays the following information:
```

- Ongoing cluster balancing tasks (for example, tablet leadership movement, tablets being added or removed).

> - Any warnings during cluster balancing (for example, a placement policy being unsatisfiable because there are no TServers in the requested zone)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Any warnings during cluster balancing. For example, if a placement policy cannot be satisfied because there are no TServers in the requested zone).
```

- Ongoing remote bootstraps from one tablet server to another, including the speed of data transfer.

To access the view, click **Utilities > Load Balancer** on your YB-Master UI.

  </div>
  <div id="yba" class="tab-pane fade" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="yba-tab">

The YugabyteDB Anywhere [Metrics](../../../yugabyte-platform/alerts-monitoring/anywhere-metrics/) page has graphs to monitoring cluster balancing progress.

You access metrics by navigating to **Universes > Universe-Name > Metrics**.

> #### Data Disk Usage graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Data Disk Usage**
```

The "Data Disk Usage" graph displays the amount of disk space used by the selected tablet server. The disk usage should be similar on all tablet servers after data is balanced.

To view the graph, select the **Resources** tab on your universe **Metrics** page.

> #### Cluster load balancer statistics graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Cluster load balancer statistics graph**
```

This graph is available only in YugabyteDB {{<release "2024.2.6">}} and later, and {{<release "2025.1.1">}} and later.

> The "Cluster load balancer statistics" graph displays an estimate of the number of tablets that still have to be moved before the cluster is considered balanced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster load balancer statistics displays an estimate of the number of tablets that still have to be moved before the cluster is considered balanced.
```

To view the graph, select the **Master Server** tab on your universe **Metrics** page as per the following illustration:

![Cluster load balancer statistics](/images/architecture/cluster-balancer-graph.png)

Cluster balancing is complete when this graph reaches 0.

#### Monitoring progress from metrics

The graph above shows the following metrics, which can be used to track the number of tablet moves that are required before the cluster is considered balanced:

- `total_table_load_difference`
- `blacklisted_leaders`
- `tablets_in_wrong_placement`

> The metric `estimated_data_to_balance_bytes` tracks how much data (in bytes) must be transferred before a cluster is balanced. This is the most accurate indicator of how long cluster balancing will take for clusters that are limited by data transfer speed.

Reviewer 2: This is not in a chart yet. I have asked YBA to add it.

> The metric `estimated_data_to_balance_bytes` tracks how much data (in bytes) must be transferred before a [cluster](../../key-concepts/#cluster) is balanced. This is often the best indicator of how long cluster balancing will take, as many clusters are disk or network limited.

Reviewer 2: This is the most accurate indicator of how long cluster balancing will take for clusters that are limited by data transfer speed
